docs: add platforms reference and how-to (#2080)
canonical/charmcraft: docs/howto/build-guides/platforms.rst

> Build platform-specific charms

Author: I like that but I have a question for @medubelko - is there a guideline for "How to" in the title?

It seems there is a mix in Charmcraft.  Further, some pages have "how to" in the title, but not in their entry in `howto/index.rst`.

> Build platform-specific charms

Reviewer: I'm avoiding repetition of "How to" in titles and filenames – it doesn't give much insight and it adds unnecessary length.

All the migrated files have the desired format, but there might be some stragglers that use the old one.

> Build platform-specific charms

Reviewer 2: I've changed this to "Customise charm platforms" and added a separate issue for making our documentation more uniform. https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/issues/2086

> Build platform-specific charms

Reviewer 2: Actually based on the [other suggestion](https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/pull/2080/files#r1917563465) I've changed this to "Select charm platforms".

Create a set of charms for multiple architectures
-------------------------------------------------

Charms may contain architecture-specific code. To build charms for specific
architectures, use the following ``charmcraft.yaml`` snippet:

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     amd64:
       build-on: [amd64]
       build-for: [amd64]
     riscv64:
       build-on: [riscv64]
       build-for: [riscv64]

Because the ``build-on`` and ``build-for`` entries are identical for each
platform, the shorthand notation can be used instead:

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     amd64:
     riscv64:

The results are the same with either snippet. Building on ``amd64`` will
produce one charm that runs on ``amd64``. Building on ``riscv64`` will produce
one charm that runs on ``riscv64``.

Create a charm for a different architecture
-------------------------------------------

A charm may require cross-compilation to build. To create a charm for a
different architecture, use the following ``charmcraft.yaml`` snippet:

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     riscv64-cross:
       build-on: [amd64]
       build-for: [riscv64]

> Building on ``amd64`` will produce one charm that runs on ``riscv64``.

Reviewer 2: Can you add a note here that the user is responsible for ensuring that their charm works on the other architecture?

All of the current plugins (`charm`, `python`, `poetry`, `uv`) will install python packages for the host architecture rather than the target architecture.

Reviewer 2: I realised we don't have an issue for this: https://github.com/canonical/craft-parts/issues/974

Author: Added, do you have a preference for the name, "users" or "charm developers"?

Reviewer: I think that here, "users" and "developers" are sufficiently distinct. That's what I'm using to signal between snap users and snap crafters.

> Create a set of charms for multiple bases

Reviewer 2: I don't have a better suggestion, but I'd like to shy away from using the term "bases" right now just because of the old "bases" key. Maybe multiple operating systems or OS releases?

Author: OSs releases would be the most accurate and bases is certainly overloaded, even if it is technically accurate.  I'll update it and add a sentence to tie the concepts of OSs, bases, and multi-base support together.

------------------------------------------

A charm can only run on a single base. A ``charmcraft.yaml`` can use multi-base
syntax to create a set of charms, each for a different base. To do this, the
base is defined in each platform entry instead of being defined with the
top-level ``base`` and ``build-base`` keywords,

To build a charm for Ubuntu 22.04 and a charm for Ubuntu 24.04, use the
following ``charmcraft.yaml`` snippet which uses :ref:`multi-base
notation<reference-platforms-multi-base>`:

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     ubuntu-22.04-amd64:
       build-on: [amd64]
       build-for: [amd64]
     ubuntu-24.04-amd64:
       build-on: [amd64]
       build-for: [amd64]

The ``build-on`` and ``build-for`` entries are identical for each platform, so
the :ref:`multi-base shorthand notation
<reference-platforms-multi-base-shorthand>` can be used:

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:

>      ubuntu@22.04:amd64:

Reviewer 3: I’m kinda surprised by the difference between ‘ubuntu-22.04-amd64’ and ‘ubuntu@22.04:amd64’ - the two seem quite different and not in a very ‘obvious’ way?

Author: Yeah, I think I was too strict with the validation and am circumventing my own rules.

I made the validation strict to prevent ambiguous definitions, like this one that is a hybrid of shorthand and longhand notation with mismatched bases:
```yaml
platforms:
  ubuntu@24.04:riscv64:
    build-on: [ubuntu@22.04:amd64, ubuntu@22.04:riscv64]
    build-for: [ubuntu@22.04:riscv64]
```

But I can circumvent my own validation by not using `<base>:<arch>`  in the platform name:
```yaml
platforms:
  ubuntu-24.04-riscv64:
    build-on: [ubuntu@22.04:amd64, ubuntu@22.04:riscv64]
    build-for: [ubuntu@22.04:riscv64]
```

I could use simple platform names like `noble-riscv64` or I could drop the validation, such that the platform name is completely arbitrary when `build-on` and `build-for` are defined.  @lengau, any thoughts?

Author: (and my examples were wrong, to add to the confusion)

Reviewer 2: My preference would be that the only time we have limitations on the name of a platform is when it's used to infer the `build-on` and `build-for`. Otherwise `Järvfjället` is a perfectly good platform name.

Author: I'm fine with that.  Once you, Claudio, and I agree on it, I can update the spec, relax the validation (which is trivial), and update the docs.

I don't think we need to block this PR.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/issues/2087

> Build platform-specific charms

Reviewer 2: Closing this to keep discussion together. https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/pull/2080/files#r1920598339

==============================

> A ``charmcraft.yaml`` defines where charms are built and where charms are run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A charm's ``charmcraft.yaml`` file determines which silicon architectures it builds on and which it can run on
```

Reviewer 2: It defines more than that. New language coming up.

> using the ``platforms``, ``base``, and ``build-base`` keywords.

Reviewer: Again being pedantic, but we don't show usage of `build-base` in this doc.

Reviewer 2: Removed for now, and added an explicit documentation notice to https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/pull/2080/files#r1919338151

See the :doc:`Platforms reference </reference/platforms>` for more information.

> 

Reviewer: To be pedantic, the first section should probably be a simple task about setting the `base`, and ignore `platforms` entirely.

> Create a charm for a specific base and architecture

Reviewer 2: `architecture` means only the silicon. `platform` can mean only that, but can mean more, depending.

> Create a charm for a specific base and architecture

Reviewer 4: FWIW, I said platform is the combination of base OS and hardware features, architecture being one part of a hardware feature.

> Create a charm for a specific base and architecture

Reviewer: Thanks for the correction!

---------------------------------------------------

To create a charm that will be built on an ``amd64`` system with Ubuntu 24.04
and will run on an ``amd64`` system with Ubuntu 24.04, use the
``charmcraft.yaml`` snippet below:

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     amd64:
       build-on: [amd64]
       build-for: [amd64]

The ``build-on`` and ``build-for`` entries are identical, so the
:ref:`shorthand notation <reference-platforms-shorthand>` can be used:

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     amd64:

The results are the same with either snippet. Building on ``amd64`` will
produce one charm that runs on an ``amd64`` Ubuntu 24.04 system.

.. note::

  The OS of the build system doesn't affect what is built. Using LXD or
  Multipass as a backend, Charmcraft will create a build environment with the
  correct OS.

Create a charm for all architectures
------------------------------------

For charms that are architecture-independent, use the following
``charmcraft.yaml`` snippet to create a single charm that can run on any

> architecture:

Reviewer 2: This might imply that you can make a charm architecture-independent just by setting `build-for: [all]`. I've started with your language and adjusted it a bit.

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     all:
       build-on: [amd64]
       build-for: [all]

Building on ``amd64`` will produce one charm that runs on any architecture on
an Ubuntu 24.04 system.

The ``all`` keyword can only be used for the ``build-for`` keyword. If the
charm can be built on multiple architectures, they must be added to the
``build-on`` keyword:

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     all:
       build-on: [amd64, riscv64]
       build-for: [all]

Building on ``amd64`` or ``riscv64`` will produce one charm that runs on all
architectures on Ubuntu 24.04 systems.

> Create a set of charms for multiple architectures

Reviewer 2: I've made this "Select multiple..." to distinguish from the different architectures below.

platform, the shorthand notation can be used instead:

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     amd64:
     riscv64:

The results are the same with either snippet. Building on ``amd64`` will
produce one charm that runs on ``amd64``. Building on ``riscv64`` will produce
one charm that runs on ``riscv64``.

Create a charm for a different architecture
-------------------------------------------

A charm may require cross-compilation to build. To create a charm for a
different architecture, use the following ``charmcraft.yaml`` snippet:

.. code-block:: yaml

   base: ubuntu@24.04
   platforms:
     riscv64-cross:
       build-on: [amd64]
       build-for: [riscv64]

Building on ``amd64`` will produce one charm that runs on ``riscv64``.

Note that the charm developer must ensure the charm is compatible with the
target architectures. By default, the `charm`_,
:ref:`python <craft_parts_python_plugin>`, :ref:`poetry <craft_parts_poetry_plugin>`,
and :ref:`uv <craft_parts_uv_plugin>` plugins will install wheels for python packages
for the ``build-on`` architecture rather than the ``build-for``. For more information,
see `craft-parts#974`_.

> Create a set of charms for multiple OS releases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select multiple platform bases
```

Alternatively, "multiple bases".

Reviewer 2: I'd rather not use the term "bases" if possible since it could confuse people about the deprecated `bases` keyword that `base` and `platforms` replace. For now I've gone with "Select multiple OS releases", but we should discuss this further.

-----------------------------------------------

A charm can only run on a single OS release or ``base``, using
``charmcraft.yaml`` nomenclature. A ``charmcraft.yaml`` can use multi-base
syntax to create a set of charms, each for a different base. To do this, the
base is defined in each platform entry instead of being defined with the
top-level ``base`` and ``build-base`` keywords.

> To build a charm for Ubuntu 22.04 and a charm for Ubuntu 24.04, use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build a set of two charms, one for Ubuntu 22.04 LTS and the other for Ubuntu 24.04 LTS, use the
```

Reviewer 2: I don't want to imply that these are different charms. (I missed this language in my earlier review - sorry!) We already have charm authors complaining that this is going to require separate revisions depending on the base.

For right now I've changed the language to say "`.charm` file" where it refers to the outcome of the pack step, but I want to get people used to the fact that the same charm version can result in multiple "binaries" (<-- not the right word either, but philosophically equivalent if you think of `charmcraft pack` as compiling) depending on the base and architecture.

We should probably set aside time to come up with specific language for this and put it in a glossary, so I've made https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/issues/2089 for that, but that doesn't answer the question in the short term :-)

Reviewer: Understood. I was a bit confused by the original text as well.

Long-term, I also prefer that users understand the correct mental model and so we can continue treating "charm" as a first-class term the same way we do "snap".

following ``charmcraft.yaml`` snippet which uses :ref:`multi-base
notation<reference-platforms-multi-base>`:

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     ubuntu-22.04-amd64:
       build-on: [ubuntu@22.04:amd64]
       build-for: [ubuntu@22.04:amd64]
     ubuntu-24.04-amd64:
       build-on: [ubuntu@24.04:amd64]
       build-for: [ubuntu@24.04:amd64]

The ``build-on`` and ``build-for`` entries are identical for each platform, so
the :ref:`multi-base shorthand notation
<reference-platforms-multi-base-shorthand>` can be used:

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:

>      ubuntu@22.04:amd64:

Reviewer: In the text we ought to point out the trailing colons for these entries, since they're easy to miss.

Reviewer 2: I agree, but where in the text? We show the shorthand notation in several places. Do we want to highlight it after each sample? (Maybe best if people are coming to a specific section for reference, but repetitive if they're reading the entire document.) After only the first sample? (The opposite problem)

Your call, but for the moment I haven't made any changes to this.

Reviewer 2: I've also added a description of this in the reference file.

Reviewer: Let's leave it for now. This could be a case where having a shiny note somewhere high-up in the page would be valuable.
